Karl Marx’s famous socioeconomic theories include his theory that the enterprising wealthy business owners (bourgeoisie) would subjugate an industrial working class (proletariat). The resulting exploitation leads to the workers not benefiting from the fruit of their labor. The capitalists want to maximize profits and secure power while the working class wanted safer conditions, higher wages, and a voice in decisions. This materialistic difference and the two groups’ end goal at each other’s expense would lead to an unavoidable social revolution of the working class fighting for a more equitable gain of profit off their labor. This Marxist theorization that the working class would rebel against the elite can be applied to the Hamlet play, uncovering several sociopolitical dynamics present in the play and empowering a fresh perspective on the structured culture of the world of Hamlet. One of these societal dynamics is the stiff class distinctions that cause social tension.
	Hamlet demonstrates how the fundamental root of all social issues is the difference in classes, which stems from the asymmetry of material, political, privileged, etc. types of differences. As Marx points out, the “history of all hitherto existing society … is the history of class struggles. Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf…” (2). Within Hamlet exists several different classes (from peasants to kings) that exude disdain and disfavor, from the power players to the abused and neglected, comparable a waterfall moving from higher to lower ground. What Marxism specifically focuses on is the effect of capitalism on society’s behaviors and demeanors; such is exemplified in inter-class relations between people of differing statuses. Societal pressures enforce the individual to look at these class distinctions in a polarized objective rather than subjective scope. Such is exemplified when Laertes advises Ophelia to not encourage Hamlet’s supposed love, for Hamlet belongs to a starkly higher class. He tells her, “You must fear / His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own / For he himself is subject to his birth / He may not, as unvalued persons do / Carve for himself…” (I.iii.16-20).  Certain key words here exhibit Laertes’ sense of inferiority and the idea that it is natural for people of his class to not be associated with the others, such as when he says “unvalued.” The projected aloofness  implies that Hamlet, simply because of his birth, is considered a valued person whose marriage must be with a worthy partner. This is key to understanding how sociopolitical dynamics work in Hamlet; clearly, inter-class relations are highly stratified and valued. Hamlet himself also serves as a crystal-clear example of incorporating social status into human interaction, in one case discernible with his conversations with Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.
Hamlet’s particularly high social status lends him enormous power, credibility, and influence in this fictional Denmark.  There is palpable disregardment of the numerous people who are below his rank, thus of less importance to him. When he reunites with Guildenstern and Rosencrantz, whom he identified as longtime friends, he is quick to point out how he wishes to treat them as friends, as opposed to the alternative. When they offer to escort him, he states, “No such matter. I will not sort you with the rest of my servants...” (II.ii.266-267). Hamlet has to address the class difference between him and his former friends. When he states he will not treat them as servants, it implies he does indeed look down upon the majority of his servants, further emphasized when Hamlet actually goes back on his word and promptly shows contempt for them. Describing what they do in life, he states, “Ay, sir, that soaks up the King’s countenance, his rewards, his / authorities. But such officers do the King best service in the / end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw- / first mouthed, to be last swallowed. When he needs what / you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you / shall be dry again.” (IV.ii.15-20). Two direct results of societal tension can be drawn from these lines: one, that Hamlet has described them as sponges, a household object, illustrating his contempt for ‘inferior’ peers that plague him. Two, they are nothing but messaging buses, spies for the king- they ‘glean’ information, store it, and then spit it out to the king, and that is all the king views them as. This social tension is particularly potent in the social stratification between people, which serves to irregularly and irrationally determine status and power.
Within Hamlet, social stratification is emphasized through the aristocracy who are impervious to the law and act as  leading to a gradation of power and status among the people. The structure of the world of Hamlet is such that evidently only certain people’s opinions are valued, as well as only the nobility’s interests extending across all of Denmark. Marxism’s ideology on the evolution of politics hand-in-hand with capitalism means that eventually only the bourgeoisie will represent national interest, thus extending to, “one government, one code of laws, one national class interest, one frontier, and one customs tariff” (Marx 6). The majority of Denmark’s citizen’s voices fall upon the ear of an uncaring upper class. The dysfunctional fluctuation of status and its entailing power and privileges leads to often ill-considered actions that treat one class favorably over another. Such is exemplified in the case of Ophelia’s suicide and her highly controversial funeral, along with its implications. Two gravediggers (evidently of lower if not lowest class) comment on her upcoming funeral, declaring, “If this had not been a gentle-woman, she should have been buried out o’ Christian burial” (V.i.23-25). Christian custom demanded that those who commit suicide do not receive a proper Christian burial, which undeniably is what happens for the middle class. However, Ophelia, a noblewoman, bended these rules  The gravediggers acknowledge that this is simply due to her social status. Overall, the social stratification serves to make the elite a sought-after status, Claudius of whom seeks for the ultimate privileges.
Claudius’ murder of his brother, the king of Denmark, is highly symbolic of the ongoing class struggle for dominance. Claudius undoubtedly felt ill will towards his brother due to the fact that he, rather than Claudius, held the throne, the power, the glory. Such fits in with the idea of him feeling exploited, and desiring for the profit of his ‘labor.’ In this case, the ‘labor’ would not be literal paid-by-the-hour labor, but his birth as his father’s son, a prince, in line to the throne. Therefore, it represents the Marxist idea that when confronted with alienation, man will move toward revolution (Matthew and Jaime 13). Defining revolution as a radical change in society, government, or economics, the deposing of Old Hamlet would certainly fit in the context of a revolution, with the top dog of the government suddenly changed without public knowledge beforehand, such as an election with regular terms. It is clear now that, as Marx states, “The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil, and has reduced the family relation to a mere money relation” (5), whereas the ‘mere money relation’ is the positions of power, unequal as they may be, both Old Hamlet and Claudius were in. Ultimately that clash of desires and realities is embodied in a metaphor coup.